So, as we should well know by now, pose has
got 2 components; a translational component
and a rotational component. And there are
several ways that we can represent a pose.
We could represent the translational component
as a vector, and then we could represent the
rotational component by a set of 3 Euler angles.
Alternatively, we could represent it by a
vector plus a set of 3 roll, pitch, yaw angles.
Or we could represent it as a vector plus
a quaternion. The fourth option is to represent
it as a homogeneous transformation and this
is what we did for the 2-dimensional case.
As we've done several times already in this
lecture we've lifted concepts from 2-dimensions
in to 3-dimensions and that's what we're going
to do next. We are going to work out how we
describe pose as a homogeneous transformation
in 3-dimensions.
Consider two 3-dimensional coordinate frames
and a point P. Now, I'm going to introduce
a frame . It has the same origin as coordinate
frame B but its axes are parallel to coordinate
frame A. I can describe the point P with respect
to the coordinate frame  by using a rotation,
rotation from coordinate frame  to coordinate
frame B. I can describe the origin of frame
by a vector with respect to frame A and
I can describe the point P in terms of a vector
with respect to coordinate frame A. I can
write a simple vector relationship. I can
add these 2 vectors because coordinate frame
has its axes parallel to those of coordinate frame A.
Now, I can substitute the first relationship
and I have now an expression for a point with
respect to frame A in terms of a vector with
respect to the original coordinate frame B
and I can substitute A for  because the
axis of frames  and A are parallel to each other.
I can substitute in the elements of the rotation
matrix and expand the vectors in terms of
their elements and then, I can augment the
vector by appending a 1 to it and move the
translation between the origins of the coordinate
frames into the matrix. And to keep things
tidy, I'm going to augment the other vector
as well which means I have to pack the matrix
out with some zeroes and ones. So, what we
have now is a homogeneous representation.
We have a homogeneous transformation matrix
and two homogeneous vectors. We can write
it in compact form like this with the note
that the homogeneous vectors by putting a
tilde above them. We can see that this matrix
comprises a rotation component, a translational
component, 3 zeroes and a one.
So, this single 4 x 4 matrix encapsulates
rotation and translation and allows us to
transform a vector describing a point from
coordinate frame B to coordinate frame A.
This 4 x 4 matrix here, we refer to as a
homogeneous transformation and these 2 vectors
here are homogeneous vectors. And just a reminder
on homogeneous vectors, we denote them by
tilde on top. We take the Cartesian vector,
in this case because it's 3-dimensional space,
it's got 3 elements A, B and C. The homogeneous
version of that has got 4 elements A, B, C
and 1. We append a 1 to it. Here it is in
a very compact form. We have a point denoted
by a homogeneous vector with respect to frame
B and we can transform it to a point described
A. Relative pose is described by single 4
x 4 matrix. A mathematician would say that
this matrix belongs to the special Euclidean
group of dimension 3 and the short hand is
that T is an element of the set SE(3); 3 indicating
the dimension in this case 3.
Instead of the abstract symbol ksi, we can
use a homogeneous transformation matrix, a
4 x 4 matrix. Compounding or composition
is simply a matrix-matrix product. To compound
2 poses, I simply multiply their representation
in terms of homogeneous transformations. Note
well that the inverse of a homogeneous transformation
is not equal to its transpose, that property
only belongs to the rotational component of
a matrix which is an orthogonal matrix. The
homogeneous transformation matrix is not an
orthogonal matrix. It's inverse is not equal
to its transpose. Finally, vector transformation
is simply a matrix-vector product.